docs: Decision Record to Return BPNs given BPN group identifier (#1867)
eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc: docs/development/decision-records/2025-03-28-expose-bpns-from-group/README.md

# Expose BPNs in a Group given a Group identifier

## Decision

TractusX-EDC will expose the BPNs  in a BPN Group provided a Group identifier. For this a new endpoint will be created in the `BusinessPartnerGroupApi`.

## Rationale

> Currently, to obtain the list of BPN groups belonging to a certain BPN, there is a need to perform [this](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/main/edc-extensions/bpn-validation/bpn-validation-api/src/main/java/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/api/bpn/v3/BusinessPartnerGroupApiV3.java#L51) request to the `BusinessPartnerGroup` api in which given a BPN the list of groups associated to it is retrieved. However, the contrary is not possible, meaning that to obtain all the BPNs in a BPN Group it is required to make the mentioned request to all BPN's in a space and then iterate over to see the associated groups.

Reviewer: Could you refer not to "this request" but name the request and I would appreciate, if the link would go to a versioned open-api spec instead to a line in main branch. This link will lose its precision easily and the record becomes unreadable.

Author: Included the concrete request and updated the link to target the 0.9.0 version in the open-api. Change in [here](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1867/commits/559010f6f25b1b992c8a1cbb44056c87551f4f89).

This process is very heavy to compute, specially on the client side since it needs to always be searching for new BPNs and check if existing BPNs were added or removed to a BPN Group.

So having a new endpoint that returns which BPNs are present in a BPN Group allows a more straightforward approach. Using the existing BPN Group API keeps consistency.

## Approach

- In `BusinessPartnerGroupApiV3` create a new GET endpoint able to resolve all BPNs for a particular BPN group given this group name. The group name should be a path param (appending `/group/{group}`).
- Response of the new endpoint should follow the format of the other read endpoint, updated to reflect the groups instead, similar to the next.
```
{
	"@id": "group-name",
	"tx:bpns": [
		"BPNL000000000001",
		"BPNL000000000002"
	],
	"@context": {...}
}
```
- Using the `BusinessPartnerStore` include a new operation that resolves the BPNs for a BPN Group and the change is reflected in the two existing implementations (In Memory and SQL).

> - Create a SQL migration to allow faster querying. Create a table for the BPN groups (where the group name is unique) and an intermediate table relating the BPNs listed in the `edc_business_partner_group` table and the new table. After this, [the column groups](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/98cfe83f698e5b89316c56b2d1bd976e6b9d7f36/edc-extensions/migrations/control-plane-migration/src/main/resources/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/postgresql/migration/bpn/V0_0_1__Init_BusinessGroup_Schema.sql#L20) in the existing table can be dropped.

Reviewer: Again, please do not point to a piece of code in main branch. And "the existing table" should also be rephrased to a concrete name. 
```suggestion
- Adapt the database schema to allow faster querying. Create a table `some name` for the BPN groups (where the group name is unique) and a relationship table as the relationship between groups and bpns is many-to-many. After this, [the column `groups`](<A link to a place that will not change or a link that is less specific, e.g., only the file>) from table `the old name` can be dropped.
- Create a schema migration to alter the table on a version update.
```

Author: Included the table name in [here](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1867/commits/559010f6f25b1b992c8a1cbb44056c87551f4f89) and also change the link to target to the 0.9.0 tag.
The remaining rephrasing will be updated in an upcoming commit.

Author: As indicated, phrasing was updated (in [here](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1867/commits/1aaa3cad54bafa7fc7149da1c1f6a5113caa9720)).

> - Create a SQL migration to allow faster querying. Create a table for the BPN groups (where the group name is unique) and an intermediate table relating the BPNs listed in the `edc_business_partner_group` table and the new table. After this, [the column groups](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/98cfe83f698e5b89316c56b2d1bd976e6b9d7f36/edc-extensions/migrations/control-plane-migration/src/main/resources/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/postgresql/migration/bpn/V0_0_1__Init_BusinessGroup_Schema.sql#L20) in the existing table can be dropped.

Reviewer 2: "Create a SQL migration to allow faster querying."
This phrase does not describe what this migration actually does and hence its hard to understand why this alone allows for faster querying. Please describe further what the migration will do.

Author: You are right. Aimed at simplicity and ended up vague. More context was add in [here](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1867/commits/1aaa3cad54bafa7fc7149da1c1f6a5113caa9720).

# Expose BPNs in a Group given a Group identifier

## Decision

> TractusX-EDC will expose the BPNs  in a BPN Group provided a Group identifier. For this a new endpoint will be created in the `BusinessPartnerGroupApi`.

Author: Makes more sense, thank you. Updated in [here](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1867/commits/e179f5990138f318e4caf2ca8673048a3cbed10d).

## Rationale

Currently, to obtain the list of BPN groups belonging to a certain BPN, there is a need to perform the [request](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/tractusx-edc/openapi/control-plane-api/0.9.0/#/Business%20Partner%20Group/resolveV3) ```GET /business-partner-groups/{bpn}``` in the `BusinessPartnerGroup` api which resolves all groups of a specific BPN. However, the contrary is not possible, meaning that to obtain all the BPNs in a BPN Group it is required to make the mentioned request to all BPN's in a space and then iterate over to see the associated groups.

This process is very heavy to compute, specially on the client side since it needs to always be searching for new BPNs and check if existing BPNs were added or removed to a BPN Group.

So having a new endpoint that returns which BPNs are present in a BPN Group allows a more straightforward approach. Using the existing BPN Group API keeps consistency.

## Approach

> 1. In `BusinessPartnerGroupApiV3` create a new GET endpoint able to resolve all BPNs for a particular BPN group given this group name. The group name should be a path param (appending `/group/{group}`).

Author: Yeah, updated to "identifier" in [here](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1867/commits/e179f5990138f318e4caf2ca8673048a3cbed10d). The proposal in this DR is also that the name is unique so it can be the identifier, however the dr is updated to use "identifier" since is more appropriate, you're right.

2. Response of the new endpoint should follow the format of the other read endpoint, updated to reflect the groups instead, similar to the next.
```
{
	"@id": "group-name",
	"tx:bpns": [
		"BPNL000000000001",
		"BPNL000000000002"
	],
	"@context": {...}
}
```
3. Using the `BusinessPartnerStore` include a new operation that resolves the BPNs for a BPN Group and the change is reflected in the two existing implementations (In Memory and SQL).
4. Adapt the DB schema by adding a SQL migration that includes a new relationship table for BPNs and BPN groups. 
    1. Create a table for the BPN groups (where the group name is unique);
    2. Populate the groups table with the groups in the `edc_business_partner_group` table (by parsing the groups json array);
    3. Create and populate a many-to-many junction table relating the BPNs listed in the `edc_business_partner_group` table and the new groups table; 

>     4. Update the statement templates in the [`PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/0.9.0/edc-extensions/bpn-validation/business-partner-store-sql/src/main/java/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/validation/businesspartner/store/sql/PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements.java) to target the updated logic;

Author: That is one of the proposals mentioned in the description and the initial one that was considered. That solution requires to evaluate through all entries to check the if the matching json contains the requested group. It eases the implementation since it does not need any migration but with more BPNs and BPN Groups being added, in time, the query would take longer and make scalability harder in my opinion.
It could be separated in two different dr's if needed or this suggested migration can be disregarded, I just believe would help scalability and performance in the future.

>     4. Update the statement templates in the [`PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/0.9.0/edc-extensions/bpn-validation/business-partner-store-sql/src/main/java/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/validation/businesspartner/store/sql/PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements.java) to target the updated logic;

Reviewer: I would also go with @bmg13 proposal, as it sounds like the cleaner approach. The DR is heading into the right direction concerning the management of BPN groups, imho, so we should clean up the database properly and not stick to previous concepts to prevent a migration.

>     4. Update the statement templates in the [`PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/0.9.0/edc-extensions/bpn-validation/business-partner-store-sql/src/main/java/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/validation/businesspartner/store/sql/PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements.java) to target the updated logic;

Reviewer 3: > but with more BPNs and BPN Groups being added, in time, the query would take longer and make scalability harder in my opinion.

this is pure speculation, that would need to be proven by proper benchmark.
I instead think that there will be no obvious difference.
In any case, [a GIN index can be used to get better performances](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/gin.html) if needed.

> I would also go with @bmg13 proposal, as it sounds like the cleaner approach. The DR is heading into the right direction concerning the management of BPN groups, imho, so we should clean up the database properly and not stick to previous concepts to prevent a migration.

"clean up" is a really relative term, correct if we think about classic plain DRM, but json types, that are wastly used in our system and also in the industry, can give different types of design to our database schema, in fact in this case I don't see the junction table cleaner than the json column

>     4. Update the statement templates in the [`PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/0.9.0/edc-extensions/bpn-validation/business-partner-store-sql/src/main/java/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/validation/businesspartner/store/sql/PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements.java) to target the updated logic;

Reviewer: I agree on the relativeness :smile: of clean and I admit, I am a bit old fashioned, but I still would think that a separate database concept for BPN Groups and a standard n:m-relationship are easier to understand and maintain, than a json stucture with content that has more meaning than a BLOB for the database engine.

>     4. Update the statement templates in the [`PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/0.9.0/edc-extensions/bpn-validation/business-partner-store-sql/src/main/java/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/validation/businesspartner/store/sql/PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements.java) to target the updated logic;

Author: > this is pure speculation, that would need to be proven by proper benchmark.

you are right, this is an assumption, I cannot prove this would improve scalability. Even without this consideration, I think having what I would see as a more organized schema could result in a simpler query as well.
This could also allow future changes/operations on BPN Groups API having these on own table. I know this is an assumption again, but could help us future proof this flow.

>     4. Update the statement templates in the [`PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/blob/0.9.0/edc-extensions/bpn-validation/business-partner-store-sql/src/main/java/org/eclipse/tractusx/edc/validation/businesspartner/store/sql/PostgresBusinessPartnerGroupStatements.java) to target the updated logic;

Reviewer 3: > > also "simpler" is relative, the query would be no more complicated than:
> 
> that query evaluates (parses) all matching group entries by requiring a subquery, while with this migration the query should be more straightforward.
> 
> ```sql
> SELECT * FROM edc_business_partner_group WHERE group_name = ?
> ```

this will be slight easier, but the one used by the `SqlBusinessPartnerStore.resolveForBpn` will became more complex because it will involve 2 tables

> > but also in this case, adding a table for BPN groups and their details won't require the junction table.
> 
> yes, but it prepares for if potential new BPN Groups details are added in own table, having the BPN group pk with a relationship to bpn's table would make this schema easier to understand. I believe that if this migration can be done, the implementation of this proposal is the best time.

as before "easier" is just your point of view :) from my perspective more tables: harder to understand.

>     5. Adapt the `BaseBusinessPartnerGroupApiController` CUD operations to target the `edc_business_partner_group` and the new BPN Groups table.

Author: not really, since existing READ is not needed to be change. However, it will be once the migration is done, so was not right. Updated in [here](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1867/commits/e179f5990138f318e4caf2ca8673048a3cbed10d) to reflect that.

>     5. Adapt the `BaseBusinessPartnerGroupApiController` CUD operations to target the `edc_business_partner_group` and the new BPN Groups table.

Reviewer 3: the point was that the CUD is not really used and at first I thought "what is that?" :D

>     5. Adapt the `BaseBusinessPartnerGroupApiController` CUD operations to target the `edc_business_partner_group` and the new BPN Groups table.

Author: I saw CUD around as well, but here does not really apply :D
